Network Observability 1.5 release notes (#70738)
openshift/openshift-docs: network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.adoc

[id="network-observability-improved-lokistack-integration"]
==== Improvements for Network Observability without Loki
You can create Prometheus alerts for the *Netobserv* dashboard using DNS, Packet drop, and RTT metrics, even if you don't use Loki. In 1.4, these metrics were only available for querying and analysis in the *Network Traffic*, *Overview*, and *Topology* views, which are not available without Loki. For more information, see xref:../network_observability/metrics-alerts-dashboards.adoc#network-observability-metrics_metrics-dashboards-alerts[Network Observability Metrics].

[id="network-observability-enhanced-configuration-and-ui-1.5"]
==== Notable enhancements 

[discrete]
[id="web-console-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Web console enhancements:

* The Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) field for egress QoS is now available in Network Observability. You can filter QoS DSCP in the web console *Network Traffic* page.

> * There are new panels added to the *Overview* view.

Reviewer: PR is still pending, let's keep an eye on it but I feel this is not going to be part of 1.5:
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1382
https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-console-plugin/pull/431

* There is a new panel display option to focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but smaller focus.

[discrete]
[id="configuration-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Configuration enhancements:

> The 1.4 release of the Network Observability Operator adds improvements and new capabilities to the {product-title} web console plugin and the Operator configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 1.5 release of the Network Observability Operator adds improvements and new capabilities to the {product-title} web console plugin and the Operator configuration.
```

[id="network-observability-zones"]
==== Availability zones
You can configure the `FlowCollector` to collect information about the cluster availability zones. This allows you to enrich network flow data with the link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#topologykubernetesiozone[`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`] label value applied to the nodes.  

// Commenting this out until https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/70974/files#top is merged--- For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-working-with-zones[Working with availability zones].

[id="network-observability-enhanced-configuration-and-ui-1.5"]
==== Notable enhancements 

[discrete]
[id="web-console-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Web console enhancements:

* There are new panels added to the *Overview* view of the Network Traffic.

> * There is a new panel display option to focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but smaller focus.

Reviewer: There are actually a bunch of UI improvements here. Do we want to list them all ?

See:
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-657
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-676

Such as:
- Collection latency warning in time range selection popup
- Panels & columns popups quick filters
- New graphs available for DNS & RTT: Min, Max, P90, P99
- Switch graph type
- Show Top / Overall

Author: Yeah I guess we don't necessarily document all of these improvements, but I agree we can point them all out.

[id="network-observability-zones"]
==== Availability zones
You can configure the `FlowCollector` to collect information about the cluster availability zones. This allows you to enrich network flow data with the link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#topologykubernetesiozone[`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`] label value applied to the nodes. For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-zonesnw-observe-network-traffic[Working with availability zones].

[id="network-observability-enhanced-configuration-and-ui-1.5"]
==== Notable enhancements 

[discrete]
[id="web-console-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Web console enhancements:

* New panels added to the *Overview* view for DNS & RTT: Min, Max, P90, P99.

> * New panel display option to focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but smaller focus, switch graph typ, and show Top / Overall.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* New panel display option to focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but smaller focus, switch graph type, and show Top / Overall.
```

Now these annotations are set in the CSV as expected. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1305[*NETOBSERV-1305*])
* Previously, the `FlowCollector` status could sometimes oscillate between "DeploymentInProgress" and "Ready" states during reconciliation.
Now, actual readiness is correctly detected, and the status only becomes "Ready" when all underlying components are fully ready.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1293[NETOBSERV-1293])

[id="network-observability-operator-1.5.0-known-issue"]
=== Known issues
* When trying to access the web console, cache issues on OCP 4.14.10 prevent access to the *Observe* view. The web console shows the error message: `Failed to get a valid plugin manifest from /api/plugins/monitoring-plugin/`. The recommended workaround is to update the cluster to the latest minor version. If this does not work, you need to apply the workarounds described in this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/7052408[Red Hat Knowledgebase article].(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1493[*NETOBSERV-1493*])

> 

Reviewer 2: @skrthomas : should we add Performance bug as a known issue? cc @openshift/netobserv-team

Author: @memodi I think in the past releases, we've decided to leave general performance bugs out of the known issues. The only time I think we noted it was when there was a specific configuration that was related to performance. That being said, I defer to SMEs about this.

Reviewer 2: @skrthomas - no worries. We had discussion in QE sync, I am fine with it being left out of RN and we can keep working it internally.

For an overview of the Network Observability Operator, see xref:../network_observability/network-observability-overview.adoc#dependency-network-observability[About Network Observability Operator].

[id="network-observability-operator-release-notes-1-5"]
== Network Observability Operator 1.5.0
The following advisory is available for the Network Observability Operator 1.5.0:

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2023:5379[ADD NEW ERRATA LINK Network Observability Operator 1.5.0]

[id="network-observability-operator-1.5.0-features-enhancements"]
=== New features and enhancements

[id="network-observability-dns-enhancements-1.5"]
==== DNS tracking enhancements

> In 1.5, the TCP protocol is now supported in addition to UDP. New dashboards are also added to the *Overview* view of the Network Traffic page. For more information, see For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-dns-overview_nw-observe-network-traffic[Configuring DNS tracking] and xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.

Author: This is a good incongruity to point out. I realize that my other features don't have "In 1.5..." so I think I should just remove this instance of it.

> In 1.5, the TCP protocol is now supported in addition to UDP. New dashboards are also added to the *Overview* view of the Network Traffic page. For more information, see For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-dns-overview_nw-observe-network-traffic[Configuring DNS tracking] and xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.

Author: Oops, yes the end of this xref is missing! Copy/paste error.

[id="network-observability-RTT-1.5"]
==== Round-trip time (RTT)

> In 1.5, you can use TCP handshake Round-Trip Time (RTT) captured from the `fentry/tcp_rcv_established` eBPF hookpoint to read SRTT to analyze network flows. In the *Overview*, *Network Traffic*, and *Topology* pages in web console, you can monitor network traffic and troubleshoot with RTT metrics, filtering, and edge labeling. For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-RTT-overview_nw-observe-network-traffic[RTT Overview] and xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-RTT_nw-observe-network-traffic[Working with RTT].

Author: eBPF isn't actually spelled out anywhere in the release notes. It is spelled out in the product documentation, but yeah I can see your point its not common to OCP.

[id="network-observability-metrics-dashboard-enhancements"]
==== Metrics, dashboards, and alerts enhancements

> The Network Observability metrics dashboards in *Observe* → *Dashboards* → *NetObserv* has new metrics types you can use to create Prometheus alerts. The list items are now in the `includeList` whereas before they were in `ignoreTags`. For a complete list of these metrics, see xref:../network_observability/metrics-alerts-dashboards.adoc#network-observability-metrics_metrics-dashboards-alerts[Network Observability Metrics].

Author: I agree. I reworked this one.

[id="network-observability-improved-lokistack-integration"]
==== Improvements for Network Observability without Loki

> You can create Prometheus alerts for the *Netobserv* dashboard using DNS, Packet drop, and RTT metrics, even if you don't use Loki. In 1.5, these metrics were only available for querying and analysis in the *Network Traffic*, *Overview*, and *Topology* views, which are not available without Loki. For more information, see xref:../network_observability/metrics-alerts-dashboards.adoc#network-observability-metrics_metrics-dashboards-alerts[Network Observability Metrics].

Author: I think actually this needs to be "In 1.4, these metrics were only available..."

[id="network-observability-zones"]
==== Availability zones
You can configure the `FlowCollector` to collect information about the cluster availability zones. This allows you to enrich network flow data with the link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#topologykubernetesiozone[`topology.kubernetes.io/zone`] label value applied to the nodes. For more information, see xref:../network_observability/observing-network-traffic.adoc#network-observability-zonesnw-observe-network-traffic[Working with availability zones].

[id="network-observability-enhanced-configuration-and-ui-1.5"]
==== Notable enhancements 

[discrete]

> [id="web-console-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]

Reviewer 3: I know that this hasn't merged yet, but PTAL at the updated guidance for using `{context}` in assemblies: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/71472

Author: All my assemblies use {context} so once this merges, I'll need to update them all probably in a separate PR, but thanks for the awareness.

===== Web console enhancements:

* New panels added to the *Overview* view for DNS & RTT: Min, Max, P90, P99.

> * New panel display options to focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but smaller focus, switch graph type, and show *Top* and *Overall*.

Author: I like it. Good suggestion thank you!

* Collection latency warning in the *Custom time range* pop-up window.
* Enhanced visibility for *Manage panels* and *Manage columns* pop-up windows contents.

> * The Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) field for egress QoS is now available for filtering QoS DSCP in the web console *Network Traffic* page.

Author: @memodi as discussed on Slack, I added this bullet back. DSCP is only a release note mention. We do not have any other product documentation for using DSCP, as it is my understanding based on conversation with Amogh that DSCP is not something that needs to be configured by Network Observability customers. Its just a field that is now available by default for filtering in the Network Traffic table, which we don't document the complete list of those fields in the Network Traffic table. Please let me know if I'm wrong about any of this 😅

Reviewer 2: that's right. No additional configuration is required in flowcollector on customers side. Thanks.

> * The Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) field for egress QoS is now available for filtering QoS DSCP in the web console *Network Traffic* page.

Author: I think majority are fragments so I'll keep it fragments. I don' think they all need to be complete sentences it would be kinda unnecessarily verbose. But pt taken about cohesion and good detail.

[discrete]
[id="configuration-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Configuration enhancements:

> The 1.5 release of the Network Observability Operator adds improvements and new capabilities to the {product-title} web console plugin and the Operator configuration.

Author: I don't think I'll take this. I usually avoid making the Operator possessive because of https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-possessives, not to make the possessive form of abbreviations or product names.

> The 1.5 release of the Network Observability Operator adds improvements and new capabilities to the {product-title} web console plugin and the Operator configuration.

Reviewer 3: NP. Do what you feel is best. :) FWIW, I definitely wouldn't use a possessive for <product_name> Operator. I do use "Operator's," as a generic reference, when it is the most direct construction.

* The `LokiStack` mode in the `spec.loki.mode` specification simplifies installation by automatically setting URLs, TLS, cluster roles and a cluster role binding, as well as the `authToken` value. The `Manual` mode allows more control over configuration of these settings.
* The API version changes from `flows.netobserv.io/v1beta1` to `flows.netobserv.io/v1beta2`.

[id="network-observability-operator-1.5.0-bug-fixes"]
=== Bug fixes

* Previously, when the `FlowCollector` resource had the `spec.console.register` value set to false, meaning that the console plugin is not automatically registered, registering the console plugin manually via the Console interface would not work, as the operator would override and erase plugin registration.
With this fix, setting the `spec.console.register` value to false does not impact the console plugin registration or registration removal, meaning that the plugin can be safely registered by other means. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1134[*NETOBSERV-1134*])

> * Previously, using the default metrics settings, the *NetObserv/Health* dashboard was showing an empty graph named "Flows Overhead". You could still get this metric by removing "namespaces-flows" and "namespaces" from the list of ignored tags. Now, using the default metrics settings, this metric is visible. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1351[*NETOBSERV-1351*])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Previously, the *NetObserv/Health* dashboard displayed an empty graph named *Flows Overhead* if you used the default metrics setting. The *Flows Overhead* metric was still available if you removed `namespaces-flows` and `namespaces` from the list of ignored tags. Now, using the default metrics settings, this metric is visible. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1351[*NETOBSERV-1351*])
```

I am not sure about how to label the graph/metric. It might be worth looking at the ISG for guidance.

Author: All the graphs are treated as GUI items in the web console, so it gets bold treatment.

Now, some help is directly displayed next to the error with a direct link for more guidance. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1464[*NETOBSERV-1464*])
* Previously, the console plugin read timeout was forced to 30s.
Now, with the `FlowCollector` `v1beta2` API update, you can configure `readTimeout` in the `loki` section to update this value accordingly with loki operator `queryTimeout` limit. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1443[*NETOBSERV-1443*])
* Previously, the Operator bundle did not advertise some supported features as expected by CSV annotations, such as "features.operators.openshift.io/..."
Now these annotations are set in the CSV as expected. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1305[*NETOBSERV-1305*])
* Previously, the `FlowCollector` status could sometimes oscillate between "DeploymentInProgress" and "Ready" states during reconciliation.
Now, actual readiness is correctly detected, and the status only becomes "Ready" when all underlying components are fully ready.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1293[NETOBSERV-1293])

[id="network-observability-operator-1.5.0-known-issue"]
=== Known issues

> * When trying to access the web console, cache issues on OCP 4.14.10 prevent access to the *Observe* view. The web console shows the error message: `Failed to get a valid plugin manifest from /api/plugins/monitoring-plugin/`. The recommended workaround is to update the cluster to the latest minor version. If this does not work, you need to apply the workarounds described in this link:https://access.redhat.com/solutions/7052408[Red Hat Knowledgebase article].(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1493[*NETOBSERV-1493*])

Reviewer 3: I think these bug fixes and known issues need another pass for style and grammar consistency. Right now, there are several sentences that are quite long and difficult to follow. Also, there are a handful of instances where double quotes are used instead of backtics.

Author: Got it. Thanks for taking a first pass at a few. I'll see what I can do about the others you mention :)

[discrete]
[id="web-console-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Web console enhancements:

* There are new panels added to the *Overview* view for DNS and RTT: Min, Max, P90, P99.
* There are new panel display options added:
** Focus on one panel while keeping others viewable but with smaller focus. 
** Switch graph type. 
** Show *Top* and *Overall*.
* A collection latency warning is shown in the *Custom time range* pop-up window.
* There is enhanced visibility for the contents of the *Manage panels* and *Manage columns* pop-up windows.
* The Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) field for egress QoS is available for filtering QoS DSCP in the web console *Network Traffic* page.

[discrete]
[id="configuration-enhancements-1.5_{context}"]
===== Configuration enhancements:

* The `LokiStack` mode in the `spec.loki.mode` specification simplifies installation by automatically setting URLs, TLS, cluster roles and a cluster role binding, as well as the `authToken` value. The `Manual` mode allows more control over configuration of these settings.

> * The `spec.agent.ebpf.kafkaBatchSize` default is changed from `10MB` to `1MB` to enhance performance when Kafka is being used. 

Author: @jotak re: https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/pull/566

wdyt? Keep it here? Move it elsewhere?

Reviewer 4: I like the placement, one tweak I might make: 
`to enhance eBPF performance when Kafka is being used.`

Reviewer 5: I think it should be more visible, and clearly call for user action, because users upgrading won't have this set automatically. I would move it as the first thing in notable enhancements, and write something like:
"When upgrading from an existing installation, this new value will not be set automatically in your configuration. If you monitor a performance regression with the eBPF Agent memory consumption after upgrading, you might consider reducing the `kafkaBatchSize` value.

Reviewer 5: ah sorry I just realize there is an "important" section below, my bad

Author: Addressed! TY!

+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> If you are running an exisiting installation of Network Observability, you can manually update this default.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This change has no effect when upgrading from an existing installation of Network Observability. In this situation, if you monitor a performance regression with the eBPF Agent memory consumption, you can apply this change manually by reducing the `kafkaBatchSize` value.
```

* The API version changes from `flows.netobserv.io/v1beta1` to `flows.netobserv.io/v1beta2`.

[id="network-observability-operator-1.5.0-bug-fixes"]
=== Bug fixes

* Previously, if automatic registration of the console plugin was disabled, registering the console plugin manually via the Console interface did not work. If the `spec.console.register` value was set to false for the `FlowCollector` resource, the Operator would override and erase the plugin registration.
With this fix, setting the `spec.console.register` value to false does not impact the console plugin registration or registration removal. As a result, the plugin can be safely registered manually. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1134[*NETOBSERV-1134*])
* Previously, using the default metrics settings, the *NetObserv/Health* dashboard was showing an empty graph named *Flows Overhead*. This metric was only available by removing "namespaces-flows" and "namespaces" from the `ignoreTags` list. With this fix, this metric is visible when you use the default metrics setting. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1351[*NETOBSERV-1351*])

> * Previously, with a specific cluster configuration, the node on which the eBPF Agent was running was not resolving, which resulted in cascading consequences that ended up in failure to provide some of the traffic metrics. Now the eBPF agent's node IP is safely provided by the Operator, inferred from the pod status, which restores those missing metrics. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1430[*NETOBSERV-1430*])

Author: Hmmm...good suggestion. I think I will take some of it and leave some detail too.

* Previously, when the Loki error 'Input size too long' occurred, users did not have much information about it; they had to search the documentation or the knowledge database.
Now, help is directly displayed in the web console next to the error with a direct link for more guidance. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1464[*NETOBSERV-1464*])
* Previously, the console plugin read timeout was forced to 30s.

> Now, with the `FlowCollector` `v1beta2` API update, you can configure the `spec.loki.readTimeout` specification to update this value accordingly with the Loki Operator `queryTimeout` limit. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1443[*NETOBSERV-1443*])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the `FlowCollector` `v1beta2` API update, you can configure the `spec.loki.readTimeout` specification to update this value according to the Loki Operator `queryTimeout` limit. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1443[*NETOBSERV-1443*])
```

> * Previously, the Operator bundle did not advertise some supported features by CSV annotations as expected, such as "features.operators.openshift.io/..."
> Now these annotations are set in the CSV as expected. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1305[*NETOBSERV-1305*])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Previously, the Operator bundle did not display/set some of the supported CSV annotations, such as `features.operators.openshift.io/`.
With this fix/release/update, these annotations are set in the CSV. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1305[*NETOBSERV-1305*])
```
